Initial content for "ABI and FFI" of "Learn unsafe Rust" (#182)
rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-consortium: subcommittee/coding-guidelines/initiatives/safe-use-of-unsafe-guidelines/learn_unsafe_rust/src/core_unsafety/abi_and_ffi.md

When one wants to call a subroutine that is implemented by a foreign language, this subroutine has to be declared in an
`extern` block. A simple example of such a block looks like this (2024 edition):

```rust
unsafe extern "C" {
    fn externally_defined_routine(arg1: u32, arg2: *mut Complex) -> bool;
}
```

Since the Rust compiler cannot check whether the signature of the declaration matches the declaration of the subroutine
on the foreign language, the whole `extern` block is marked as unsafe (Note: The `unsafe` keyword was optional in older
editions but doesn't change the semantics of subroutine declarations in the `extern` block).

Calling such a subroutine almost works like calling an ordinary function. However, since the Rust compiler cannot know
whether the called subroutine violates any of the Rust safety guarantees, calling an external subroutine also needs to
be wrapped in an `unsafe` block, like this:

```rust
let mut complex = Complex { ... };
let success = unsafe {
    externally_defined_routine(24, &mut complex)
};
...
```

Notice that the Rust compiler also checks whether the subroutine signature is compatible with the C language. If a type

> is used which is not supported by C and warns in such a case. It is strongly advisable to rework the signature if such

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is used which is not supported by C, the Rust compiler emits a warning. It is strongly advisable to rework the signature if such
```

Reviewer: A small rewriting suggestion I found while reading this part.

# ABI and FFI

## What is an ABI?

The term ABI stands for Application Binary Interface and describes a set of rules that enable different parts of a
program to interact with each other in a defined way *after these parts have been translated to a binary entity*. This
is a non-comprehensive list of properties an ABI defines:

* Size, alignment and endianness of basic data types like integers, floats or pointers
* Layout, padding and alignment of compound types like tuples and structs
* A protocol to transfer program flow to a subroutine (and back)
* A protocol to generate and handle exceptional errors

> Note that not all ABIs define all mentioned categories - if a certain language does not support a certain technology,

Reviewer 2: It may be useful to give some example here or go into it later. May come off as a bit too high-level.

the ABI that supports the technology isn't usually supported well - or not at all.

It is usually the task of the linker to collect the bits of a program and merge it into an executable. This will only
result in a working program if all parts of the program agree on the same ABI. If there are ABI incompatibilities, this
will usually lead to trouble during program execution, like data corruption or crashes.

## About the "C ABI"

> When you're looking for information about linking parts of a program (potentially written in different languages) on the

Reviewer 2: I think I agree with what's in the `About the "C ABI"` section here. It feels like some references could be useful here to bolster credibility.

Author: I did find quite some stackoverflow-and-the-like references but I feel that we need something "more credible" than that, so I added some words from the C standard. Would that be it or would anyone know more credible sources?

Reviewer 2: Seems reasonable to me. Maybe add the full number of the ISO C standard + make it a link?

Author: Added

interaction mechanics the C language offers. The major building blocks are

* The provisioning of basic data types that are compatible across language boundaries.
* Describing complex data types by means of structures, arrays and unions of other complex types or basic data types.
* Calling a subroutine with a set of parameters and at most one return value.
* Offering functions that can be called by foreign languages.
* Accessing global memory defined (and possibly initialized) by a foreign language.

All other language building blocks supported by either language need to be projected onto these building blocks.

The following sections briefly describe these building blocks. For more details one can follow the references.

### Basic data types and FFI

A lot of Rust's basic data types (especially integral types) have corresponding types in C. However, there is no direct
and universal match of Rust's basic types to C's basic types. Instead, it is a good idea to use type aliases that exist
on each side. This is a type mapping list that universally works on all platforms:

| Rust type             | C type             |
|-----------------------|--------------------|

> | u8                    | uint8_t            |

Reviewer 2: Suggest surround programming language concepts in ticks "``"

| std::ffi::c_schar     | signed char        |
| std::ffi::c_uchar     | unsigned char      |
| std::ffi::c_int       | (signed) int       |
| std::ffi::c_uint      | unsigned int       |
| std::ffi::c_short     | (signed) short     |
| std::ffi::c_ushort    | unsigned short     |
| std::ffi::c_long      | (signed) long      |
| std::ffi::c_ulong     | unsigned long      |
| std::ffi::c_longlong  | (signed) long long |
| std::ffi::c_ulonglong | unsigned long long |
| std::ffi::c_double    | double             |
| std::ffi::c_float     | float              |

Pointers are guaranteed to be compatible. There's a slight gotcha, though: It is legal in Rust to create so-called fat
pointers. This happens if you create a pointer to a slice or a trait object, since both entities need more than just a
pointer to the start of the data. However, the Rust compiler will warn in case such a pointer is used on an FFI
boundary.

### Complex types

Rust (like the majority of other languages) allows for combining basic datatypes to complex datatypes in various ways.
A subset thereof can also be used across language boundaries. This is true for arrays, structs and unions. Enums and

> tuples cannot be used and doing so will lead to a compiler warning.

Reviewer 2: Suggest showing how arrays, structs, and unions apply here with an example and another example on how a compiler warning is generated via usage of enums and tuples.

Author: I added an example for an improper_ctypes warning. I would also add an example for a union but I would skip arrays and structs, it's just too straight forward imo.

When defining types that are used across the language boundary it is of utmost importance to define the same type with

> the exact same layout as in the other language. Failing to do so will inevitably lead to data corruption and undefined

Author: This is planned, see #150: There is a planned section "Mitigations for FFI unsafety" / "Existing FFI tooling".

> the exact same layout as in the other language. Failing to do so will inevitably lead to data corruption and undefined

Reviewer 2: This might just be me, but would you be okay with (after reviewed and approved) merging what you have thus far and then opening another PR for further additions?

> the exact same layout as in the other language. Failing to do so will inevitably lead to data corruption and undefined

Author: As long as this stays inside this repo (its certainly not ready for upstream) I wouldn't object. I'll mark it as ready for review; I would then focus on incorporating all comments so that we can merge this and then continue?

> the exact same layout as in the other language. Failing to do so will inevitably lead to data corruption and undefined

Reviewer 2: That makes sense as a plan to me. Thanks!

behavior.

> Although data definitions can be a potential source of undefined behavior, they are _not_ marked `unsafe` since the

Reviewer 2: Example code could be useful here

`unsafe`.

### Calling subroutines from Rust

When one wants to call a subroutine that is implemented by a foreign language, this subroutine has to be declared in an
`extern` block. A simple example of such a block looks like this (2024 edition):

```rust
unsafe extern "C" {
    fn externally_defined_routine(arg1: u32, arg2: *mut Complex) -> bool;
}
```

Since the Rust compiler cannot check whether the signature of the declaration matches the declaration of the subroutine
on the foreign language, the whole `extern` block is marked as unsafe (Note: The `unsafe` keyword was optional in older
editions but doesn't change the semantics of subroutine declarations in the `extern` block).

Calling such a subroutine almost works like calling an ordinary function. However, since the Rust compiler cannot know
whether the called subroutine violates any of the Rust safety guarantees, calling an external subroutine also needs to
be wrapped in an `unsafe` block by default, like this:

```rust
let mut complex = Complex { ... };
let success = unsafe {
    externally_defined_routine(24, &mut complex)
};
...
```

> You can, however, explicitly declare an external function declaration as `safe`, in which case you can call this

Reviewer 2: Expansion on why and when we might do this could be useful.

function just like an ordinary Rust function.

Notice that the Rust compiler also checks whether the subroutine signature is compatible with the C language. If a type
is used which is not supported by C, the Rust compiler emits a warning. It is strongly advised to rework the signature

> if such an `improper_ctype` warning appears as the chances for undefined behavior are high, and even if the program

Reviewer 2: I'd be interested to see a concrete example of where this warning is generated.

Author: I added this above.

works in a particular version of Rust, this might change any time in case the memory layout of such a type changes due

> to the updated Rust version.

Author: I have a section about "other C calling conventions". Will add it there.

### Offering subroutines to a foreign language

> Strictly speaking, this is not really a thing for the Learn Unsafe Rust endeavour since offering a callable over the

Reviewer 2: I think an example here could help:

> However, this does not mean that you cannot cause undefined behavior here in the same way this happens also for the other direction: If the signatures are not compatible, this will almost inevitably lead to misinterpretation of data and undefined behavior.

misinterpretation of data and undefined behavior. But since the cause is not on Rust's side, there is no need to mark
such functions as `unsafe`.

### Shared static data

It is also possible to use static data that has been defined by program parts that have been written in another
language. Such data is also declared inside an `extern` block, just like foreign functions. However, since they're
externally defined, they do not need an initializer as it is the responsibility of the foreign translation unit to
initialize statics before the execution of the program's entry point. Since the compiler cannot verify whether the data
type definition fits the one from the foreign language, any access to such a static variable is unsafe by default. Just
like with foreign subroutine, you can also declare such a variable as `safe` so that you can access it just like a Rust
static variable.

Notice that Rust requires static data to be initialized before _any_ Rust code runs. This is typically fine since any
static data will, in usual environments, be initialized by code that runs before the actual `main` function is called.

> For C, this is true even if the static does not have an explicit initializer. In this case, the memory is zeroed.

Reviewer 3: More esoteric features like creating references on shared data (read exclusive or write, lifetimes, atomic types) could be mentioned here as an outlook.

Author: @cpetig Can you elaborate more on what you would like to see here? I'm having a hard time to understand how I would extend that paragraph with that outlook.

  Rust FFI either.

It is usually the task of the linker to collect the bits of a program and merge it into an executable. This will only
result in a working program if all parts of the program agree on the same ABI. If there are ABI incompatibilities, this
will usually lead to trouble during program execution, like data corruption or crashes.

## About the "C ABI"

When you're looking for information about linking parts of a program (potentially written in different languages) on the
internet, one often comes across the term "C ABI". Due to the vast amount of code written in C, the language became a de
facto standard for compatibility on various levels. That's also the reason why you find that term in Rust source, like
`repr(C)` or `extern "C"`. However, the C language itself does not define an ABI.  This is underlined by the ISO C
standard which states in its `Scope` chapter in the second paragraph:
> 2 This International Standard does not specify
> - the mechanism by which C programs are transformed for use by a data-processing
    system;
> - the mechanism by which C programs are invoked for use by a data-processing
    system;
> ...

> This basically means that the standard neither says how source is turned into anexecutable nor how this executable is

Reviewer 4: missing space anexecutable -> an executable

* A protocol to generate and handle exceptional errors

Note that not all ABIs define all mentioned categories - if a certain language does not support a certain technology,
the ABI that supports the technology isn't usually supported well - or not at all. Examples of such mechanics:

> * C++ exceptions: Since Rust's FFI is C-based, C++ exceptions cannot cross laguage boundaries and must not bubble up to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* C++ exceptions: Since Rust's FFI is C-based, C++ exceptions cannot cross language boundaries and must not bubble up to
```

### Complex types

Rust (like the majority of other languages) allows for combining basic datatypes to complex datatypes in various ways.
A subset thereof can also be used across language boundaries. This is true for arrays, structs and unions. Arrays and
structs are declared just like the native Rust counterpart with an added `#repr(C)` annotation. Unions are less common
in normal Rust code since they do not store which variant is used a a particular moment which makes them difficult to

> use due to the unsafe blocks needed to read from them. However, some C APIs do contain unions so that they also hove to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use due to the unsafe blocks needed to read from them. However, some C APIs do contain unions so that they also have to
```
Unsure -- maybe this was intended to be "have"?

`extern` function definition or global variable definition, respectively: If such objects reference a data definition
that does not fit the definition of the data type in the foreign language, such a type usage acts like an unchecked,
unsafe type cast. Since the compiler cannot check type consistency across languages, these items need to be marked
`unsafe`:

```c
struct X {
    uint64_t val;
};

X EXPORTED_DATA = { 17 };
```

```rust

> // Not unsafe, although the definition does not match the type on C with the same name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Not unsafe, although the definition does not match the type in C with the same name.
```

```

You can, however, explicitly declare an external function declaration as `safe`, in which case you can call this
function just like an ordinary Rust function. This makes sense if there is no parameter combination that triggers
undefined behavior in the foreign subroutine; it is therefore advisable to only do this if there is no parameter that,

> by definition, cannot be checked for its validity, e.g. pointers. Since the compiler cannot verify this, it is only

Reviewer 2: Is this only a restriction for when we're using pointers or is this any time we mark a function as `safe` to have an `unsafe` external block?

Maybe an example would be helpful?

Author: The `safe` has to be put inside the `unsafe` declaration block and basically tells the compiler in an unsafe manner that calling this function always (no matter what the program state or the parameters are) obeys Rust's safety guarantees. I'll add an example.

allowed to put the `safe` qualifier inside an `unsafe` external block and the developer is obligated to check for the
absence of any unsafe behavior on certain input parameters.

Notice that the Rust compiler also checks whether the subroutine signature is compatible with the C language. If a type
is used which is not supported by C, the Rust compiler emits a warning. It is strongly advised to rework the signature
if such an `improper_ctype` warning (see [Complex types](#complex-types)) appears as the chances for undefined behavior

> are high, and even if the program works in a particular version of Rust, this might change any time in case the memory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are high, and even if the program works in a particular version of Rust, this might change any time the memory
```

> layout of such a type changes due to the updated Rust version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
layout of such a type changes due to the updated Rust version due to Rust's unstable ABI.
```

Author: Changed but in a different way. Please check whether that's fine as well.

While this (and following) chapter usually mean `extern "C"` when talking about external linkage, there are also
other calling conventions that sometimes are used as an alternative to the "standard" C calling convention for a certain
triple. While these calling conventions are equivalent feature-wise, they emphasize a different optimization target by
changing aspects like how parameters are being transferred to the subroutine and who is dong the cleanup of the stack.
Examples are the x86 "fastcall" or "stdcall" calling conventions. Usually, these calling conventions also have to be

> explicitly set also on the C/C++ side. While it is optional to specify the calling convention when declaring a function

Reviewer 2: I have seen folks get a bit pedantic anytime `C/C++` shows up, even in a reasonable case like this, so perhaps use "or"?

```suggestion
explicitly set also on the C or C++ side. While it is optional to specify the calling convention when declaring a function
```

undefined behavior in the foreign subroutine; it is therefore advisable to only do this if there is no parameter that,
by definition, cannot be checked for its validity, e.g. pointers. Since the compiler cannot verify this, it is only
allowed to put the `safe` qualifier inside an `unsafe` external block and the developer is obligated to check for the
absence of any unsafe behavior on certain input parameters. Such a declaration then looks like this:

```rust
unsafe extern "C" {
    safe fn simple_callable(data: u32) -> bool;
}

// ...

fn some_function(val: u32) {
    // No `unsafe` required here!

>     if simple_callable(val) {

Reviewer 2: This is nice and helps to explain.

        // ...
    }
}
```

If we assume that this function is defined for any value of its input parameters (which is something that the developer
has to manually validate!), then it can be declared as `safe` and no `unsafe` block is needed when using it.

Notice that the Rust compiler also checks whether the subroutine signature is compatible with the C language. If a type
is used which is not supported by C, the Rust compiler emits a warning. It is strongly advised to rework the signature
if such an `improper_ctype` warning (see [Complex types](#complex-types)) appears as the chances for undefined behavior
are high. And even if the program works in a particular version of Rust, this might change any time the memory layout

> of such a type changes due to the updated Rust version changing Rust's native ABI, which is (and probably always will

Reviewer 2: I'd feel better if we removed the "(and probably always will be)" part, just because we don't know what the future holds. You could add a bit of nuance here by referencing past and on-going conversations around ABI stability and providing links as necessary.

But yes -- it looks like in the near term the ABI will not be stabilized and there's still much design work and discussion to be had.

Author: I just removed the part to not sound like an oracle - a quick research did not reveal an "authoritative source" that clearly states the stance of the project on ABI stability, although there seems to be an informal consensus that a stable ABI does more harm than good and one should use either the C ABI or things like crABI.

Rust code just fine. However, this does not mean that you cannot cause undefined behavior here in the same way this
happens also for the other direction: If the signatures are not compatible, this will almost ineviatably lead to
misinterpretation of data and undefined behavior. But since the cause is not on Rust's side, there is no need to mark
such functions as `unsafe`:

Rust side:
```rust
#[repr(C)]
struct SampleType {
    ...
}

#[no_mangle]
extern "C" callable_from_the_outside(val: &SampleType)
{
    ...
}
```

C side:
```c
struct SampleType {
    ...
};

void callable_from_the_outside(const char* val);

int main()
{
    callable_from_the_outside("Hello, Undefined Behavior!");
}
```

`const char*` has the same size and layout as a Rust reference since pointers and Rust references have the same layout
(see [the reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/type-layout.html#r-layout.pointer.intro)). Since (thin)
pointers in C and Rust always have the same size and layout no matter what the pointed-to type is, this will be
compatible layout-wise. However, Rust expects a struct whereas this example will call the function with an arbitrary

> string which invokes undefined behavior due to the incompatible pointed-to type.

Reviewer 2: Nice nuance here.
